# Extracted source text

- Source ID: SRC-UC-000009
- Original relative path: use_cases/telecom/telco-ebook-10-key-gen-ai-applications-3315945-r8-web.pdf
- Current relative path: use_cases/telecom/telco-ebook-10-key-gen-ai-applications-3315945-r8-web.pdf
- Classification: public
- Processing route: external_processing_approved
- Processing state: extracted
- Extraction tool: pdftotext
- Extraction attempted at: 2026-07-24T13:59:58Z

---

Ebook

10 Key Generative AI
Applications for
Telecom Leaders

Transforming Telecom
Companies With Generative AI

67%
reported that AI adoption has
helped increase revenues

Telecom companies often navigate a complex
landscape where challenges such as network
congestion, security threats, and the intricacies of
5G implementation arise. Combined with the rising
expectations of digitally savvy consumers, these
obstacles can disrupt telecom operations, impede
growth, and compromise service quality.
At its core, generative AI holds the promise
of unlocking insights to enhance customer
experiences, optimize network performance to
boost service capacity, and drive revenue growth for
telecommunications companies worldwide. Telecom
companies gain several benefits by using generative
AI, including: dialogue diversity, faster response
time, efficient billing support, enhanced sales and
marketing, multimodal capabilities, reduced call
volume, and improved self-service options.
According to NVIDIA’s “State of AI in
Telecommunications” 2024 report of 400+ telecom
industry professionals, 31% of respondents said they
invested in at least six AI use cases in 2023, while
40% are planning to scale to six or more use cases in

2024. For generative AI, 57% are using it to improve
customer service and support, 57% to improve
employee productivity, 48% for network operations
and management, 40% for network planning and
design, and 32% for marketing content generation.
For telecom companies already investing in AI,
67% reported that AI adoption has helped increase
revenues, with 19% of respondents noting revenue
growth of over 10%. Likewise, 63% reported that AI
adoption has helped reduce costs, with 14% noting
cost reductions of more than 10%.
With the intersection of telecommunications and
AI, it’s essential for business leaders to explore the
profound implications of generative AI across a
spectrum of use cases. From network optimization
and predictive maintenance to personalized
customer experiences and data monetization,
generative AI promises to alter every facet of the
telecom industry—ushering in a new era of efficiency,
innovation, and unparalleled connectivity.

10 Key Generative AI Applications for Telecom Leaders | Ebook | 2

Enhancing Customer Experiences

Telecom companies are challenged to differentiate
themselves through customer service and support
in a competitive market measured by average
revenue per user (ARPU). Generative AI unlocks new
opportunities for organizations to enhance customer
support, reduce churn, cut operating expenses, and
grow revenue.
Intelligent chatbots and virtual assistants, powered
by generative AI, improve customer service by
enabling customer agents to understand customer
intent, providing personalized responses and offering
targeted suggestions for promotions and products.
By tailoring content and offers based on individual
customer preferences, telecom companies can
enhance customer engagement with personalized
offers and promotions based on voice and data plans.
This technology applies AI chatbots, retrievalaugmented generation (RAG), and natural language
and image processing to understand customer
inquiries. It then provides relevant, accurate
responses in a timely manner. Generative AI supports
customer agents to reduce time to resolution (TTR),
which leads to higher customer satisfaction and
reduces churn.
In addition, generative AI agents can generate email
notifications to customers to alert them of network
issues ahead of time and propose mitigation plans.

10 Key Generative AI Applications for Telecom Leaders | Ebook | 3

ServiceNow Automates Case
Summarization and Recommends
Next-Best Actions
Telecom companies are challenged with customer
agents spending significant time and energy
manually reviewing conversation logs and chats
to search for relevant documentation to resolve
incoming customer calls.
To solve this issue, ServiceNow offers Now Assist
for Telecommunications Service Management
(TSM) powered by NVIDIA AI. This technology can
summarize case activities and chat interactions, then
guide next-best actions for customer service agents.
This provides value by enhancing productivity for
customer service agents through rapidly generating
summaries for cases, work notes, interactions, and
other record types.

As a further step, ServiceNow and NVIDIA
demonstrated an NVIDIA-powered avatar interacting
with a telecom company’s customer. The digital
agent identifies the customer’s issue, offers an
option for a faster internet connection, confirms
the caller’s credit card number, and upgrades their
internet connection in near real time. The demo was
built with NVIDIA NIM™ and NVIDIA ACE—all available
with the NVIDIA AI Enterprise software platform.
Read the press release and watch the demo to
learn more.

ServiceNow recently piloted Now Assist for TSM with
one of the largest telecom companies in Europe, with
results indicating a 55% improvement for customer
agents writing case summaries and reviewing
complex notes.

NVIDIA Avatar Cloud Engine. Image courtesy of ServiceNow.

Amdocs Transforms Customer Billing With Generative AI
In contact centers, billing inquiries represent a
significant volume of customer calls. Customers seek
explanations that could affect their bill, including
their mobile plan, the conclusion of a promotional
period, or an unexpected charge. Telecom companies
are challenged to resolve customer billing inquiries in
a timely and personalized manner to avoid potential
revenue loss or customer abandonment.
Amdocs, a leading provider of software and services
for communications and media providers, is using
generative AI to create a billing care agent that helps
telecom companies reduce revenue leakage and delay
from customer billing, while increasing operational
efficiency. Amdocs built amAIz, a domain-specific
generative AI platform for telecom companies. This
open, secure, cost-effective, and large language model
(LLM)-agnostic framework offers a unique, patentpending telecom taxonomy.

The amAIz platform uses NVIDIA AI Foundry, including
NVIDIA DGX™ Cloud and NVIDIA AI Enterprise
software, to provide solutions based on commercially
available LLMs as well as domain-adapted models.
This enables service providers to build and deploy
enterprise-grade generative AI applications. Amdocs is
also using NVIDIA NIM, a set of easy-to-use inference
microservices designed to accelerate the deployment
of generative AI across enterprises.
Using NVIDIA NIM, Amdocs is able to deliver a
faster, lower cost and accurate LLM-powered
solution, including:
> Reducing cost of handle time in call center by
30%–40%
> Improving the accuracy of AI-generated responses
to customer inquiries by up to 30%

Image courtesy of Amdocs.

> Reducing tokens consumed for deployed use cases
by as much as 60% in data preprocessing and 40%
in inferencing (using NIM)
> Reducing query latency by approximately 80%,
ensuring that end users experience near real-time
responses (using NIM)
Read the technical blog post to learn more.

10 Key Generative AI Applications for Telecom Leaders | Ebook | 5

Data Monsters Advances Virtual Avatars
and Holographic Communication
Data Monsters, an elite NVIDIA professional services
partner, was looking to improve virtual communication
and interactions with their customers—requiring
24/7 support and multi-language understanding. The
company wanted a solution trained on enterprise data
and desired a new approach to training and education
of their customer service team.

This solution offers a new method for telecom
companies to interact with their customers across
time zones and languages.

To address these issues, Data Monsters is developing
holographic communication and AI-driven avatars,
powered by generative AI, to advance the future of
intelligent automation. The company uses NVIDIA
Omniverse™ to build digital twins and metaverse
experiences; NVIDIA® ACE for AI-powered speech in
their avatars; and NVIDIA AI Enterprise for end-toend AI development and deployment. This includes
automatic dubbing solutions to elevate content with
AI-powered speakers, real-time speech-to-text, and
subtitling and captioning.
Using generative AI, Data Monsters achieved
significant benefits, including faster time to
resolution, reduced call volume, expanded support
time per caller, and higher net promoter score (NPS).
Image courtesy of Data Monsters.

10 Key Generative AI Applications for Telecom Leaders | Ebook | 6

Network Operations, Planning, and Design
Telecom companies can leverage AI solutions to
enhance network operation, design, and engineering
processes. By automating network configuration
and optimization, AI can improve the efficiency
and accuracy of network planning and design.
This technology enables telecom operators to
streamline their operations and reduce manual
effort, resulting in cost savings and faster
deployment of network infrastructure.
Generative AI helps translate technical, complex
network logs into simplified English, enabling
telecom companies to interactively communicate
with and understand their network data. AI-powered
tools automatically capture and update network
configurations, topologies, and field equipment
details. This allows network operators to gain realtime visibility into network health and assign field
technicians for faster troubleshooting and reduced
downtime, improving network performance and
reliability. In addition, generative AI can be used
to analyze network logs and identify patterns or
anomalies that indicate cybersecurity threats.

10 Key Generative AI Applications for Telecom Leaders | Ebook | 7

Infosys Transforms Network Operation
Centers and Automates Network Design
Telecom companies are challenged with meeting
service-level agreements (SLAs) for customers that
ensure high network quality of service. This includes
quickly troubleshooting network devices with complex
issues, identifying root causes, and resolving issues
efficiently at their network operations center (NOC).
Network architects, engineers, and IT professionals
manually retrieve and customize Topology and

Orchestration Specification for Cloud Applications
(TOSCA) templates to meet firm industry
specifications for network design.
To automate network troubleshooting, Infosys
built a generative AI solution using NVIDIA NIM
inference microservices and NVIDIA NeMo Retriever
microservices. The solution achieved 61% lower
latency and 22% absolute improvement to streamline

NOC processes, minimize network downtime, and
optimize network performance.
In addition, Infosys developed an automated tool to
generate standard TOSCA templates, deployed using
NVIDIA NIM and NeMo Retriever. The generative AIpowered solution achieved 28.5% lower latency and
15% absolute improvement in accuracy. This frees
network service designers, as well as OSS solution
architects and directors, to design carrier-grade
networks faster.
Read the technical blog posts on network
troubleshooting and network design to learn more.

10 Key Generative AI Applications for Telecom Leaders | Ebook | 8

Quantiphi Assists Field Technicians
With AI for Network Operations
Field technicians at a major U.S. telecom company
encountered challenges with the complexity of fiber
installation and related technical procedures. This
complexity often led to obstacles that technicians
were unable to resolve independently, resulting in

delays and frequent support from backend network
engineers. This reliance caused increased network
downtime, higher operating costs, and reduced
customer satisfaction for the telecom operator.

Quantiphi, an NVIDIA Elite Partner, built an LLMpowered dialog agent to provide insights for field
technicians to resolve network-related issues quickly
and automatically service customer tickets. The
solution utilizes NVIDIA® Riva and NeMo services
to build, customize, and deploy virtual assistants,
integrating automatic speech recognition,
conversational agents, and information retrieval.
As a result, Quantiphi increased field technician
productivity, reduced resolution time for network
repairs, and enhanced customer experience. Watch
the demo.
The field technician dialog agent was one of over 40
applications integrated with LLM and RAG. Quantiphi
developed an enterprise generative AI platform
to build and deploy repeatable modules for LLMpowered applications, enhancing business processes
across the value chain, from supply chain and field
operations to customer service. These applications
were optimized through parameter-efficient finetuning and effective data management, improving
model accuracy. This resulted in 8X reduction in
latency and over 70% cost savings.

Image courtesy of Quantiphi.

10 Key Generative AI Applications for Telecom Leaders | Ebook | 9

Wipro Unlocks the Power of Network Digital Twins
Digital twins enable telecom companies to simulate
physical network changes, analyze performance, and
validate decisions—enhancing operational efficiency
and network quality.

This improved network capacity and resource
utilization for telecom companies while enhancing
network quality of service with fewer dropped calls
for customers.

Wipro was challenged with network change
management to test network configurations before
deployment and identify potential issues that save
time and cost. Another issue was analyzing and
predicting network performance to analyze to
prevent quality degradation. In addition, telecom
companies need to ensure their radio access network
(RAN) slices deliver on their service-level agreements
(SLAs) to fulfill business contract requirements.
To address these challenges, Wipro built a telecom
network digital twin using NVIDIA Omniverse, a
platform for developing OpenUSD applications for
industrial digitalization and generative physical
AI. The solution enabled 5G new radio (NR) traffic
steering and slice SLA assurance. Wipro’s AI/ML
model predicts SLA adherence of RAN slices and
suggests necessary steps to avoid SLA violations.

Image courtesy of Wipro.

10 Key Generative AI Applications for Telecom Leaders | Ebook | 10

Kinetica Boosts Network Intelligence
Using Text-to-SQL
Kinetica was challenged with breaking down silos
between IT teams to obtain insights from network
data using non-jargon language.
To address this issue, Kinetica built an analytics
platform with a user interface powered by generative
AI to transform text-based searches into SQL
queries. This enables IT teams and field technicians
at telecom companies to have dynamic conversations
with their network data using simple English. The
platform quickly identifies areas experiencing
network performance and specific buildings with the
largest affected populations.
As a result, Kinetica enables telecom companies to
prioritize deployment of field technicians based on
customer density—reducing time to resolve network
outages and minimizing customer impact.

Kinetica text-to-SQL engine for telecom network intelligence, visualizing buildings in Nashville affected
by a network outage by population density. Image courtesy of Kinetica.

Read the blog post to learn more.

10 Key Generative AI Applications for Telecom Leaders | Ebook | 11

Mavenir Builds Network Operations Co-Pilot
and Automates RAN Service Assurance
Mavenir was challenged with deciphering complex
telecom network data and translating it into
understandable English text. The company
desired interaction with their network easily and
in real time. Mavenir aimed to synthesize network
issue tickets and provide recommendations
for faster resolutions to reduce unplanned
downtime. In addition, the company wanted to
enhance network assurance by understanding
log anomalies and determining root causes.

As a result of using generative AI, Mavenir achieved
faster time to resolution for network issues,
increased effectiveness of their network operation
centers, and improved the productivity of field
technicians repairing network equipment.

To address these issues, Mavenir built a generative
AI-powered co-pilot for their network operations
center. The solution—powered by NVIDIA NeMo™,
NVIDIA DGX™ Cloud, and NVIDIA AI Enterprise—
quickly translates network logs to human-readable
language, provides root-cause analysis, and gives
recommendations to resolve network issues.

Telecom network log anomalies detected by Mavenir’s network operations
co-pilot, developed with NVIDIA and AWS. Image courtesy of Mavenir.

10 Key Generative AI Applications for Telecom Leaders | Ebook | 12

ServiceNow Automates Network
Planning and Operations
ServiceNow was challenged with distilling and
actioning on volumes of complex technical data
generated from wireless network incidents. The
company also needed to meet diverse network
services, local configurations, and rulings.

To improve network operations, ServiceNow used
generative AI to summarize network incident data.
The solution reduced mean time to resolution
(MTTR), tailored communication to enhance IT team
satisfaction, and efficiently prioritized high-risk
incidents to reduce disruption to customer service.

For example, in the case of a fiber cut, ServiceNow’s
generative AI solution can decipher technical jargon,
distill complex information into clear and concise
summaries, and speed up time to resolution. This not
only drives cost savings, but also improves customer
experiences by minimizing service disruptions.
ServiceNow also built a network configuration
template for network design and fulfillment. The
solution improves time to market for new wireless
networks; increases customer loyalty with fast,
accurate service delivery; and reduces manual errors
that lead to delivery delays, customer dissatisfaction,
and costly corrections.

10 Key Generative AI Applications for Telecom Leaders | Ebook | 13

Deloitte Launches AI-Powered
Telecommunications Solutions
Telecom companies are looking to provide their
mobile users with higher-speed connectivity and
better user experiences. Deloitte was challenged with
building solutions using AI and 5G to enable efficient
and automated network operations.

For wireless systems, Deloitte also helps telecom
companies enhance network edge capabilities and
provides private enterprise networks with advanced
5G and 6G solutions using NVIDIA-powered ORANbased 5G systems.

To solve this problem, Deloitte worked with NVIDIA
across key areas, including: AI-powered telecom edge,
accelerated networking, and AI-powered wireless.
At the edge, Deloitte enables telecom companies to
monetize 5G by leveraging NVIDIA edge AI technology
across innovative use cases in computer vision, AR/VR,
cloud gaming, robotics, and digital twins.
For networks, Deloitte integrated NVIDIA AI in
network virtualization, cloud-native infrastructure,
VNF acceleration, 5G UPF, firewall, SBC, and precision
timing solutions. The company’s cybersecurity
solutions utilize NVIDIA Morpheus to enhance
telecom networks, including IPSEC offload,
accelerated firewall, and network security solutions.

10 Key Generative AI Applications for Telecom Leaders | Ebook | 14

Future of Generative AI and
AI Agent Workflows
Generative AI agents enable multistep reasoning
for a given objective, dividing it into subtasks across
multiple tools, managing resources, and providing full
explainability throughout the process. For telecom
companies, this means AI agents that utilize LLMs for
both customer experience and network operations.
Take the example of a customer chatting with a
virtual customer service agent about their network
health. To provide the best-fit response, the AI agent
undertakes several steps, including:

> Transcribing the question and sending it to
“Service Agent,” powered by NVIDIA NIM.
> Having “Service Agent” NIM query “Network Agent”
NIM, which uses RAG to retrieve the latest network
health status from a vector database.
> Having “Service Agent” NIM query “Billing/Promo
Agent” NIM, which uses RAG to retrieve the
latest customer billing information and applicable
promotions.
> Reranking answers and providing audio-based
answers to customer using “Service Agent.”

Ready to Get Started?
To learn more about generative AI for telecommunications,
visit nvidia.com/telco-ai
© 2024 NVIDIA Corporation and affiliates. All rights reserved. NVIDIA, the NVIDIA logo, ConnectX, DGX, HGX, Hopper, NGC, NVIDIA-Certified Systems, and NVLink
are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of NVIDIA Corporation and affiliates in the U.S. and other countries. Other company and product names may be
trademarks of the respective owners with which they are associated. 3315945. Aug24

This ensures the generative AI models used
are domain-specific to telecom companies and
connected to their up-to-date enterprise data.
While the telecom industry is in the early phase
of the AI investment cycle, generative AI is fueling
investments to transform customer experience and
network operations. By unlocking new opportunities
to reduce operating expenses and increase
revenue, generative AI can help transform the
telecommunications industry.

