# Extracted source text

- Source ID: SRC-SCO-000001
- Original relative path: decision_environment/technology-generational-moment-generative-ai-cio-cto-guide.pdf
- Current relative path: decision_environment/technology-generational-moment-generative-ai-cio-cto-guide.pdf
- Classification: public
- Processing route: external_processing_approved
- Processing state: extracted
- Extraction tool: pdftotext
- Extraction attempted at: 2026-07-24T13:59:58Z

---

Technology’s generational
moment with generative AI:
A CIO and CTO guide
CIOs and CTOs can take nine actions to reimagine business and technology
with generative AI.
This article is a collaborative effort by Aamer Baig, Sven Blumberg, Eva Li, Douglas Merrill, Adi Pradhan,
Megha Sinha, Alexander Sukharevsky, and Stephen Xu, representing views from McKinsey Digital.

© Getty Images

July 2023

Hardly a day goes by without some new
business-busting development related to
generative AI surfacing in the media. The
excitement is well deserved—McKinsey research
estimates that generative AI could add the
equivalent of $2.6 trillion to $4.4 trillion of value
annually.¹
CIOs and chief technology officers (CTOs) have a
critical role in capturing that value, but it’s worth
remembering we’ve seen this movie before. New
technologies emerged—the internet, mobile,
social media—that set off a melee of experiments
and pilots, though significant business value
often proved harder to come by. Many of the
lessons learned from those developments still
apply, especially when it comes to getting past
the pilot stage to reach scale. For the CIO and

CTO, the generative AI boom presents a unique
opportunity to apply those lessons to guide the
C-suite in turning the promise of generative AI
into sustainable value for the business.
Through conversations with dozens of tech
leaders and an analysis of generative AI initiatives
at more than 50 companies (including our own),
we have identified nine actions all technology
leaders can take to create value, orchestrate
technology and data, scale solutions, and
manage risk for generative AI (see sidebar, “A
quick primer on key terms”):
1. Move quickly to determine the company’s
posture for the adoption of generative AI,
and develop practical communications to, and
appropriate access for, employees.

A quick primer on key terms
Generative AI is a type of AI that can create new content (text, code, images, video) using patterns it has learned by training on extensive (public) data with machine learning (ML) techniques.
Foundation models (FMs) are deep learning models trained on vast quantities of unstructured, unlabeled data that can be used for
a wide range of tasks out of the box or adapted to specific tasks through fine-tuning. Examples of these models are GPT-4, PaLM 2,
DALL·E 2, and Stable Diffusion.
Large language models (LLMs) make up a class of foundation models that can process massive amounts of unstructured text and
learn the relationships between words or portions of words, known as tokens. This enables LLMs to generate natural-language text,
performing tasks such as summarization or knowledge extraction. Cohere Command is one type of LLM; LaMDA is the LLM behind
Bard.
Fine-tuning is the process of adapting a pretrained foundation model to perform better in a specific task. This entails a relatively short
period of training on a labeled data set, which is much smaller than the data set the model was initially trained on. This additional training
allows the model to learn and adapt to the nuances, terminology, and specific patterns found in the smaller data set.
Prompt engineering refers to the process of designing, refining, and optimizing input prompts to guide a generative AI model toward
producing desired (that is, accurate) outputs.
Learn more about generative AI in our explainer “What is generative AI” on McKinsey.com.

1

2

“The economic potential of generative AI: The next productivity frontier,” McKinsey, June 14, 2023.

Technology’s generational moment with generative AI: A CIO and CTO guide

2. Reimagine the business and identify use
cases that build value through improved
productivity, growth, and new business
models. Develop a “financial AI” (FinAI)
capability that can estimate the true costs and
returns of generative AI.
3. Reimagine the technology function, and focus
on quickly building generative AI capabilities in
software development, accelerating technical
debt reduction, and dramatically reducing
manual effort in IT operations.
4. Take advantage of existing services or adapt
open-source generative AI models to develop
proprietary capabilities (building and operating
your own generative AI models can cost tens
to hundreds of millions of dollars, at least in the
near term).
5. Upgrade your enterprise technology
architecture to integrate and manage
generative AI models and orchestrate how
they operate with each other and existing AI and
machine learning (ML) models, applications, and
data sources.
6. Develop a data architecture to enable access
to quality data by processing both structured
and unstructured data sources.
7. Create a centralized, cross-functional
generative AI platform team to provide
approved models to product and application
teams on demand.
8. Invest in upskilling key roles—software
developers, data engineers, MLOps engineers,
and security experts—as well as the broader
nontech workforce. But you need to tailor the
training programs by roles and proficiency
levels due to the varying impact of generative AI.
9. Evaluate the new risk landscape and
establish ongoing mitigation practices to
address models, data, and policies.

1. Determine the company’s posture for
the adoption of generative AI
As use of generative AI becomes increasingly
widespread, we have seen CIOs and CTOs respond
by blocking employee access to publicly available
applications to limit risk. In doing so, these
companies risk missing out on opportunities for
innovation, with some employees even perceiving
these moves as limiting their ability to build
important new skills.
Instead, CIOs and CTOs should work with risk
leaders to balance the real need for risk mitigation
with the importance of building generative AI
skills in the business. This requires establishing
the company’s posture regarding generative AI
by building consensus around the levels of risk
with which the business is comfortable and how
generative AI fits into the business’s overall strategy.
This step allows the business to quickly determine
company-wide policies and guidelines.
Once policies are clearly defined, leaders should
communicate them to the business, with the CIO
and CTO providing the organization with appropriate
access and user-friendly guidelines. Some
companies have rolled out firmwide communications
about generative AI, provided broad access to
generative AI for specific user groups, created popups that warn users any time they input internal
data into a model, and built a guidelines page that
appears each time users access a publicly available
generative AI service.

2. Identify use cases that build value
through improved productivity,
growth, and new business models
CIOs and CTOs should be the antidote to the “death
by use case” frenzy that we already see in many
companies. They can be most helpful by working
with the CEO, CFO, and other business leaders
to think through how generative AI challenges
existing business models, opens doors to new ones,
and creates new sources of value. With a deep
understanding of the technical possibilities, the

Technology’s generational moment with generative AI: A CIO and CTO guide

3

CIO and CTO should identify the most valuable
opportunities and issues across the company that
can benefit from generative AI—and those that
can’t. In some cases, generative AI is not the best
option.
McKinsey research, for example, shows generative
AI can lift productivity for certain marketing use
cases (for example, by analyzing unstructured
and abstract data for customer preference) by
roughly 10 percent and customer support (for
example, through intelligent bots) by up to 40
percent.² The CIO and CTO can be particularly
helpful in developing a perspective on how best
to cluster use cases either by domain (such as
customer journey or business process) or use case
type (such as creative content creation or virtual
agents) so that generative AI will have the most
value. Identifying opportunities won’t be the most
strategic task—there are many generative AI use
cases out there—but, given initial limitations of
talent and capabilities, the CIO and CTO will need
to provide feasibility and resource estimates to
help the business sequence generative AI priorities.
Providing this level of counsel requires tech leaders
to work with the business to develop a FinAI
capability to estimate the true costs and returns on
generative AI initiatives. Cost calculations can be
particularly complex because the unit economics
must account for multiple model and vendor costs,
model interactions (where a query might require
input from multiple models, each with its own fee),
ongoing usage fees, and human oversight costs.

3. Reimagine the technology function
Generative AI has the potential to completely
remake how the tech function works. CIOs and
CTOs need to make a comprehensive review of
the potential impact of generative AI on all areas
of tech, but it’s important to take action quickly to
build experience and expertise. There are three
areas where they can focus their initial energies:

— Software development: McKinsey research
shows generative AI coding support can help
software engineers develop code 35 to 45
percent faster, refactor code 20 to 30 percent
faster, and perform code documentation 45
to 50 percent faster.³ Generative AI can also
automate the testing process and simulate
edge cases, allowing teams to develop
more-resilient software prior to release, and
accelerate the onboarding of new developers
(for example, by asking generative AI questions
about a code base). Capturing these benefits
will require extensive training (see more in
action 8) and automation of integration and
deployment pipelines through DevSecOps
practices to manage the surge in code volume.
— Technical debt: Technical debt can account for
20 to 40 percent of technology budgets and
significantly slow the pace of development.⁴
CIOs and CTOs should review their tech-debt
balance sheets to determine how generative
AI capabilities such as code refactoring,
code translation, and automated test-case
generation can accelerate the reduction of
technical debt.
— IT operations (ITOps): CIOs and CTOs will
need to review their ITOps productivity efforts
to determine how generative AI can accelerate
processes. Generative AI’s capabilities are
particularly helpful in automating such tasks
as password resets, status requests, or
basic diagnostics through self-serve agents;
accelerating triage and resolution through
improved routing; surfacing useful context,
such as topic or priority, and generating
suggested responses; improving observability
through analysis of vast streams of logs to
identify events that truly require attention; and
developing documentation, such as standard
operating procedures, incident postmortems,
or performance reports.

2

Ibid.
Begum Karaci Deniz, Martin Harrysson, Alharith Hussin, and Shivam Srivastava, “Unleashing developer productivity with generative AI,”
McKinsey, June 27, 2023.
4
Vishal Dalal, Krish Krishnakanthan, Björn Münstermann, and Rob Patenge, “Tech debt: Reclaiming tech equity,” McKinsey, October 6, 2020.
3

4

Technology’s generational moment with generative AI: A CIO and CTO guide

4. Take advantage of existing services
or adapt open-source generative AI
models
A variation of the classic “rent, buy, or build” decision
exists when it comes to strategies for developing
generative AI capabilities. The basic rule holds true:
a company should invest in a generative AI capability
where it can create a proprietary advantage for the
business and access existing services for those that
are more like commodities.
The CIO and CTO can think through the implications
of these options as three archetypes:
— Taker—uses publicly available models through
a chat interface or an API, with little or no
customization. Good examples include offthe-shelf solutions to generate code (such
as GitHub Copilot) or to assist designers with
image generation and editing (such as Adobe
Firefly). This is the simplest archetype in terms of
both engineering and infrastructure needs and
is generally the fastest to get up and running.
These models are essentially commodities that
rely on feeding data in the form of prompts to the
public model.
— Shaper—integrates models with internal data
and systems to generate more customized
results. One example is a model that supports
sales deals by connecting generative AI
tools to customer relationship management
(CRM) and financial systems to incorporate
customers’ prior sales and engagement
history. Another is fine-tuning the model with
internal company documents and chat history
to act as an assistant to a customer support
agent. For companies that are looking to
scale generative AI capabilities, develop more
proprietary capabilities, or meet higher security
or compliance needs, the Shaper archetype is
appropriate.
There are two common approaches for
integrating data with generative AI models in
this archetype. One is to “bring the model to
the data,” where the model is hosted on the
organization’s infrastructure, either on-premises
or in the cloud environment. Cohere, for example,
deploys foundation models on clients’ cloud

infrastructure, reducing the need for data
transfers. The other approach is to “bring
data to the model,” where an organization can
aggregate its data and deploy a copy of the large
model on cloud infrastructure. Both approaches
achieve the goal of providing access to the
foundation models, and choosing between them
will come down to the organization’s workload
footprint.
— Maker—builds a foundation model to address
a discrete business case. Building a foundation
model is expensive and complex, requiring
huge volumes of data, deep expertise, and
massive compute power. This option requires
a substantial one-off investment—tens or
even hundreds of millions of dollars—to build
the model and train it. The cost depends on
various factors, such as training infrastructure,
model architecture choice, number of model
parameters, data size, and expert resources.
Each archetype has its own costs that tech
leaders will need to consider (Exhibit 1). While new
developments, such as efficient model training
approaches and lower graphics processing unit
(GPU) compute costs over time, are driving costs
down, the inherent complexity of the Maker
archetype means that few organizations will adopt
it in the short term. Instead, most will turn to some
combination of Taker, to quickly access a commodity
service, and Shaper, to build a proprietary capability
on top of foundation models.

5. Upgrade your enterprise technology
architecture to integrate and manage
generative AI models
Organizations will use many generative AI models
of varying size, complexity, and capability. To
generate value, these models need to be able to
work both together and with the business’s existing
systems or applications. For this reason, building a
separate tech stack for generative AI creates more
complexities than it solves. As an example, we can
look at a consumer querying customer service at a
travel company to resolve a booking issue (Exhibit
2). In interacting with the customer, the generative
AI model needs to access multiple applications and
data sources.

Technology’s generational moment with generative AI: A CIO and CTO guide

5

Exhibit 1

Each archetype has its own costs.
Archetype Example use
cases
— Off-the-shelf
coding assistant
for software
developers

Taker

— General-purpose
customer
service chatbot
with prompt
engineering only
and text chat only

Estimated total cost of ownership
~ $0.5 million to $2.0 million, one-time
— Off-the-shelf coding assistant: ~$0.5 million for integration. Costs include a team of 6 working for 3 to
4 months.
— General-purpose customer service chatbot: ~$2.0 million for building plug-in layer on top of 3rd-party
model API. Costs include a team of 8 working for 9 months.
~ $0.5 million, recurring annually
— Model inference:
• Off-the-shelf coding assistant: ~$0.2 million annually per 1,000 daily users
• General-purpose customer service chatbot: ~$0.2 million annually, assuming 1,000 customer chats
per day and 10,000 tokens per chat
— Plug-in-layer maintenance: up to ~$0.2 million annually, assuming 10% of development cost.

— Customer
service chatbot
fine-tuned with
sector-specific
knowledge and
chat history

Shaper

~ $2.0 million to $10.0 million, one-time unless model is fine-tuned further
— Data and model pipeline building: ~$0.5 million. Costs include 5 to 6 machine learning engineers and
data engineers working for 16 to 20 weeks to collect and label data and perform data ETL.¹
— Model fine-tuning²: ~$0.1 million to $6.0 million per training run³
• Lower end: costs include compute and 2 data scientists working for 2 months
• Upper end: compute based on public closed-source model fine-tuning cost
— Plug-in-layer building: ~$1.0 million to $3.0 million. Costs include a team of 6 to 8 working for 6 to 12
months.
~ 0.5 million to $1.0 million, recurring annually
— Model inference: up to ~$0.5 million recurring annually. Assume 1,000 chats daily with both audio and
texts.
— Model maintenance: ~$0.5 million. Assume $100,000 to $250,000 annually for MLOps platform⁴ and
1 machine learning engineer spending 50% to 100% of their time monitoring model performance.
— Plug-in-layer maintenance: up to ~$0.3 million recurring annually, assuming 10% of development cost.

— Foundation
model trained
for assisting in
patient diagnosis

Maker

~ $5.0 million to $200.0 million, one-time unless model is fine-tuned or retrained
— Model development: ~$0.5 million. Costs include 4 data scientists spending 3 to 4 months on model
design, development, and evaluation leveraging existing research.
— Data and model pipeline: ~$0.5 million to $1.0 million. Costs include 6 to 8 machine learning engineers
and data engineers working for ~12 weeks to collect data and perform data ETL.¹
— Model training⁵: ~$4.0 million to $200.0 million per training run.³ Costs include compute and labor cost
of 4 to 6 data scientists working for 3 to 6 months.
— Plug-in-layer building: ~$1.0 million to $3.0 million. Costs include a team of 6 to 8 working 6 to 12
months.
~ $1.0 million to $5.0 million, recurring annually
— Model inference: ~$0.1 million to $1.0 million annually per 1,000 users. Assume each physician sees 20
to 25 patients per day and patient speaks for 6 to 25 minutes per visit.
— Model maintenance: ~$1.0 million to $4.0 million recurring annually. Assume $250,000 annually for
MLOps platform⁴ and 3 to 5 machine learning engineers to monitor model performance.
— Plug-in-layer maintenance: up to ~$0.3 million recurring annually, assuming 10% of development cost.

Note: Through engineering optimizations, the economics of generative AI are evolving rapidly, and these are high-level estimates based on total cost of ownership
(resources, model training, etc) as of mid-2023.
1

Extract, transform, and load.

² Model is fine-tuned on data set consisting of ~100,000 pages of sector-specific documents and 5 years of chat history from ~1,000 customer representatives, which is

~48 billion tokens. Lower end cost consists of 1% parameters retrained on open-source models (eg, LLaMA) and upper end on closed-source models. Chatbot can be
accessed via both text and audio.
³ Model is optimized after each training run based on use of hyperparameters, data set, and model architecture. Model may be refreshed periodically when needed (eg, with
fresh data).
⁴ Gilad Shaham, “Build or buy your MLOps platform: Main considerations,” LinkedIn, November 3, 2021.
5
Model is trained on 65 billion to 1 trillion parameters and data set of 1.2 to 2.4 trillion tokens. The tool can be accessed via both text and audio.
6

Technology’s generational moment with generative AI: A CIO and CTO guide

Exhibit 2

Generative
at at
keykey
touchpoints
to enable
a tailored
GenerativeAIAIisisintegrated
integrated
touchpoints
to enable
a tailored
customer
journey.
customer journey.
Illustrative customer journey using travel agent bot
Customer

Customer logs in and requests
to change booking

API calls

Customer reviews
options

Customer requests
live agent

Customer completes booking change and drops off

Disagrees
Interaction

Chatbot
activated

Chatbot
communicates
message
and
options

Generative AI
model

Model
receives
user
request
and pulls
user info in
prompt

Backend apps

Log-in authentification, model/customer info access
authorization

Booking
modification
policy
management

Customer ID data

Customer history
data

Model
checks
booking
policy and
sees customer cannot make
change

Chatbot
responds

Chatbot
pings
customer
support

Selects
option

Model
explains
issue and
gives
alternate
options

Model
instructs
booking
system to
complete
task

Agent
picks up
case
and
provides
new
solution

Agent
inputs
new solution for
review/
feedback
to model

Model
instructs
customer
support
system to
assign
agent

Workflow
management
for booking

Workflow
management for
live agent
assignment

Data
source

Infrastructure
and
compute

Policy data

Booking system
data

Agent assignment
data

Cloud/on-premises infrastructure and compute

McKinsey & Company

Technology’s generational moment with generative AI: A CIO and CTO guide

7

For the Taker archetype, this level of coordination
isn’t necessary. But for companies looking to
scale the advantages of generative AI as Shapers
or Makers, CIOs and CTOs need to upgrade their
technology architecture. The prime goal is to
integrate generative AI models into internal systems
and enterprise applications and to build pipelines to
various data sources. Ultimately, it’s the maturity of
the business’s enterprise technology architecture
that allows it to integrate and scale its generative AI
capabilities.
Recent advances in integration and orchestration
frameworks, such as LangChain and LlamaIndex,
have significantly reduced the effort required to
connect different generative AI models with other
applications and data sources. Several integration
patterns are also emerging, including those that
enable models to call APIs when responding to
a user query—GPT-4, for example, can invoke
functions—and provide contextual data from an
external data set as part of a user query, a technique
known as retrieval augmented generation. Tech
leaders will need to define reference architectures
and standard integration patterns for their
organization (such as standard API formats and
parameters that identify the user and the model
invoking the API).
There are five key elements that need to be
incorporated into the technology architecture to
integrate generative AI effectively (Exhibit 3):
— Context management and caching to
provide models with relevant information from
enterprise data sources. Access to relevant
data at the right time is what allows the model to
understand the context and produce compelling
outputs. Caching stores results to frequently
asked questions to enable faster and cheaper
responses.
— Policy management to ensure appropriate
access to enterprise data assets. This control
ensures that HR’s generative AI models that
include employee compensation details, for
example, cannot be accessed by the rest of the
organization.

8

— Model hub, which contains trained and
approved models that can be provisioned on
demand and acts as a repository for model
checkpoints, weights, and parameters.
— Prompt library, which contains optimized
instructions for the generative AI models,
including prompt versioning as models are
updated.
— MLOps platform, including upgraded MLOps
capabilities, to account for the complexity of
generative AI models. MLOps pipelines, for
example, will need to include instrumentation
to measure task-specific performance, such
as measuring a model’s ability to retrieve the
right knowledge.
In evolving the architecture, CIOs and CTOs will
need to navigate a rapidly growing ecosystem
of generative AI providers and tooling. Cloud
providers provide extensive access to at-scale
hardware and foundation models, as well as a
proliferating set of services. MLOps and model
hub providers, meanwhile, offer the tools,
technologies, and practices to adapt a foundation
model and deploy it into production, while
other companies provide applications directly
accessed by users built on top of foundation
models to perform specific tasks. CIOs and CTOs
will need to assess how these various capabilities
are assembled and integrated to deploy and
operate generative AI models.

6. Develop a data architecture to
enable access to quality data
The ability of a business to generate and
scale value, including cost reductions and
improved data and knowledge protections, from
generative AI models will depend on how well it
takes advantage of its own data. Creating that
advantage relies on a data architecture that
connects generative AI models to internal data
sources, which provide context or help fine-tune
the models to create more relevant outputs.

Technology’s generational moment with generative AI: A CIO and CTO guide

Exhibit 3

The tech stack for generative AI is emerging.

The tech stack for generative AI is emerging.
Illustrative generative AI tech stack

Apps-as-aservice with
embedded
foundation
models
End-userfacing
applications
and foundation models
accessed
through a
browser
interface as
SaaS¹ (eg,
Midjourney)

Data sources
Embeddings,
unstructured
data,
analytical
data, transactional data

Users
Apps

Models

Tooling

Infrastructure

Experience layer
DTC² or B2B applications (eg, Jasper)

Policy
management

API gateway

Context management and caching
User and task context retrieved from enterprise data
sources to prompt generative AI models, cache for
common requests

Data
platforms
Vector
databases,
data
warehouse,
data lake

Model hub
Platforms that allow users to share
models and data sets (eg, Hugging Face)

Closed-source
foundation
models
API-based, pretrained models
(eg, GPT-4)

Data

Role-based
access
control and
contentbased policies
to secure
enterprise
data assets

Prompt
library

Open-/closed-source
foundation models
Trained model that is made
accessible (eg, BLOOM)

MLOps platform

Existing enterprise platforms
(eg, ERP,³ CRM⁴)

Cloud or on-premises infrastructure
and compute hardware

QA and
observability
QA model
outputs (eg,
checks for bias)

Software as a service.
Direct to consumer.
Enterprise resource planning.
4
Customer relationship management.
1

2

3

McKinsey & Company

Technology’s generational moment with generative AI: A CIO and CTO guide

9

In this context, CIOs, CTOs, and chief data officers
need to work closely together to do the following:
— Categorize and organize data so it can be used
by generative AI models. Tech leaders will need
to develop a comprehensive data architecture
that encompasses both structured and
unstructured data sources. This requires putting
in place standards and guidelines to optimize
data for generative AI use—for example, by
augmenting training data with synthetic samples
to improve diversity and size; converting media
types into standardized data formats; adding
metadata to improve traceability and data
quality; and updating data.
— Ensure existing infrastructure or cloud services
can support the storage and handling of the
vast volumes of data needed for generative AI
applications.
— Prioritize the development of data pipelines to
connect generative AI models to relevant data
sources that provide “contextual understanding.”
Emerging approaches include the use of vector
databases to store and retrieve embeddings
(specially formatted knowledge) as input for
generative AI models as well as in-context
learning approaches, such as “few shot
prompting,” where models are provided with
examples of good answers.

7. Create a centralized, cross-functional
generative AI platform team
Most tech organizations are on a journey to a
product and platform operating model. CIOs and
CTOs need to integrate generative AI capabilities
into this operating model to build on the existing
infrastructure and help to rapidly scale adoption
of generative AI. The first step is setting up a
generative AI platform team whose core focus is
developing and maintaining a platform service
where approved generative AI models can be
provisioned on demand for use by product and
application teams. The platform team also defines
protocols for how generative AI models integrate

5

10

with internal systems, enterprise applications,
and tools, and also develops and implements
standardized approaches to manage risk, such as
responsible AI frameworks.
CIOs and CTOs need to ensure that the platform
team is staffed with people who have the right
skills. This team requires a senior technical leader
who acts as the general manager. Key roles include
software engineers to integrate generative AI
models into existing systems, applications, and
tools; data engineers to build pipelines that
connect models to various systems of record and
data sources; data scientists to select models and
engineer prompts; MLOps engineers to manage
deployment and monitoring of multiple models and
model versions; ML engineers to fine-tune models
with new data sources; and risk experts to manage
security issues such as data leakage, access
controls, output accuracy, and bias. The exact
composition of the platform team will depend on
the use cases being served across the enterprise. In
some instances, such as creating a customer-facing
chatbot, strong product management and user
experience (UX) resources will be required.
Realistically, the platform team will need to work
initially on a narrow set of priority use cases,
gradually expanding the scope of their work as they
build reusable capabilities and learn what works
best. Technology leaders should work closely with
business leads to evaluate which business cases to
fund and support.

8. Tailor upskilling programs by roles
and proficiency levels
Generative AI has the potential to massively
lift employees’ productivity and augment their
capabilities. But the benefits are unevenly
distributed depending on roles and skill levels,
requiring leaders to rethink how to build the actual
skills people need.
Our latest empirical research using the generative
AI tool GitHub Copilot, for example, helped software
engineers write code 35 to 45 percent faster.⁵ The

“Unleashing developer productivity with generative AI,” June 27, 2023.

Technology’s generational moment with generative AI: A CIO and CTO guide

benefits, however, varied. Highly skilled developers
saw gains of up to 50 to 80 percent, while junior
developers experienced a 7 to 10 percent decline in
speed. That’s because the output of the generative
AI tools requires engineers to critique, validate,
and improve the code, which inexperienced
software engineers struggle to do. Conversely, in
less technical roles, such as customer service,
generative AI helps low-skill workers significantly,
with productivity increasing by 14 percent and staff
turnover dropping as well, according to one study.⁶

Beyond training up tech talent, the CIO and CTO
can play an important role in building generative
AI skills among nontech talent as well. Besides
understanding how to use generative AI tools for
such basic tasks as email generation and task
management, people across the business will
need to become comfortable using an array of
capabilities to improve performance and outputs.
The CIO and CTO can help adapt academy models
to provide this training and corresponding
certifications.

These disparities underscore the need for
technology leaders, working with the chief human
resources officer (CHRO), to rethink their talent
management strategy to build the workforce of the
future. Hiring a core set of top generative AI talent
will be important, and, given the increasing scarcity
and strategic importance of that talent, tech
leaders should put in place retention mechanisms,
such as competitive salaries and opportunities
to be involved in important strategic work for the
business.

The decreasing value of inexperienced engineers
should accelerate the move away from a classic
talent pyramid, where the greatest number of
people are at a junior level, to a structure more
like a diamond, where the bulk of the technical
workforce is made up of experienced people.
Practically speaking, that will mean building the
skills of junior employees as quickly as possible
while reducing roles dedicated to low-complexity
manual tasks (such as writing unit tests).

Tech leaders, however, cannot stop at hiring.
Because nearly every existing role will be affected
by generative AI, a crucial focus should be on
upskilling people based on a clear view of what
skills are needed by role, proficiency level, and
business goals. Let’s look at software developers
as an example. Training for novices needs to
emphasize accelerating their path to become top
code reviewers in addition to code generators.
Similar to the difference between writing and
editing, code review requires a different skill set.
Software engineers will need to understand what
good code looks like; review the code created
by generative AI for functionality, complexity,
quality, and readability; and scan for vulnerabilities
while ensuring they do not themselves introduce
quality or security issues in the code. Furthermore,
software developers will need to learn to think
differently when it comes to coding, by better
understanding user intent so they can create
prompts and define contextual data that help
generative AI tools provide better answers.

9. Evaluate the new risk landscape
and establish ongoing mitigation
practices

6

Generative AI presents a fresh set of ethical
questions and risks, including “hallucinations,”
whereby the generative AI model presents
an incorrect response based on the highestprobability response; the accidental release of
confidential personally identifiable information;
inherent bias in the large data sets the models
use; and high degrees of uncertainty related to
intellectual property (IP). CIOs and CTOs will need
to become fluent in ethics, humanitarian, and
compliance issues to adhere not just to the letter
of the law (which will vary by country) but also to
the spirit of responsibly managing their business’s
reputation.
Addressing this new landscape requires a
significant review of cyber practices and updating
the software development process to evaluate
risk and identify mitigation actions before model

Erik Brynjolfsson, Danielle Li, and Lindsey R. Raymond, Generative AI at work, National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) working paper,
number 31161, April 2023.

Technology’s generational moment with generative AI: A CIO and CTO guide

11

development begins, which will both reduce issues
and ensure the process doesn’t slow down. Proven
risk-mitigation actions for hallucinations can
include adjusting the level of creativity (known as
the “temperature”) of a model when it generates
responses; augmenting the model with relevant
internal data to provide more context; using libraries
that impose guardrails on what can be generated;
using “moderation” models to check outputs; and
adding clear disclaimers. Early generative AI use
cases should focus on areas where the cost of error
is low, to allow the organization to work through
inevitable setbacks and incorporate learnings.
To protect data privacy, it will be critical to establish
and enforce sensitive data tagging protocols, set
up data access controls in different domains (such
as HR compensation data), add extra protection
when data is used externally, and include privacy
safeguards. For example, to mitigate access control

risk, some organizations have set up a policymanagement layer that restricts access by role
once a prompt is given to the model. To mitigate
risk to intellectual property, CIOs and CTOs should
insist that providers of foundation models maintain
transparency regarding the IP (data sources,
licensing, and ownership rights) of the data sets
used.

Generative AI is poised to be one of the fastestgrowing technology categories we’ve ever seen.
Tech leaders cannot afford unnecessary delays
in defining and shaping a generative AI strategy.
While the space will continue to evolve rapidly,
these nine actions can help CIOs and CTOs
responsibly and effectively harness the power of
generative AI at scale.

Aamer Baig is a senior partner in McKinsey’s Chicago office; Sven Blumberg is a senior partner in the Düsseldorf office; Eva
Li is a consultant in the Bay Area office, where Megha Sinha is a partner; Douglas Merrill is a partner in the Southern California
office; Adi Pradhan and Stephen Xu are associate partners in the Toronto office; and Alexander Sukharevsky is a senior
partner in the London office.
The authors wish to thank Stephanie Brauckmann, Anusha Dhasarathy, Martin Harrysson, Klemens Hjartar, Alharith Hussin,
Naufal Khan, Sam Nie, Chandrasekhar Panda, Henning Soller, Nikhil Srinidhi, Asin Tavakoli, Niels Van der Wildt, and Anna
Wiesinger for their contributions to this article.
Copyright © 2023 McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved.

12

Technology’s generational moment with generative AI: A CIO and CTO guide

