# Extracted source text

- Source ID: SRC-ORG-000004
- Original relative path: organization/research/create-generative-ai-value-at-scale.pdf
- Current relative path: organization/research/create-generative-ai-value-at-scale.pdf
- Classification: public
- Processing route: external_processing_approved
- Processing state: extracted
- Extraction tool: pdftotext
- Extraction attempted at: 2026-07-24T13:59:58Z

---

Create Generative AI
Value at Scale
Kevin Schmitt, Gregory Vial, and Ivo Blohm

Companies expanding GenAI across the enterprise use new
structures like an “AI spine” to coordinate efforts.

June 1, 2026
Summer 2026, Vol. 67, No. 4
Reprint 67417

sloanreview.mit.edu

AI IN THE ENTERPRISE
[ Organization ]

Create Generative AI Value
at Scale
Companies expanding GenAI across the enterprise use new structures like an
“AI spine” to coordinate efforts.
By Kevin Schmitt, Gregory Vial, and Ivo Blohm

G

ENERATIVE AI PRESENTS AN ORGAnizational puzzle. Businesses have collectively invested billions of dollars to give
employees access to general-purpose large
language models (LLMs) to enhance personal productivity while in most cases
struggling to develop and adopt more strategic applications of the technology. Meaningful return
on investment, much less competitive advantage, is
likely to remain elusive unless companies can use GenAI
to make innovative process improvements that scale
across functions and business units.¹
Our interviews with 87 practitioners in 23 large organizations revealed that leaders who scale value creation

26 MIT Sloan Management Review

summer 2026

with generative AI cultivate three key practices. First,
they expand the scope of use cases across processes rather
than remaining focused on a specific task. Second, they
treat each use case as a work in progress to be continually improved. And third, they quickly identify and
abandon use cases that fail to bring measurable value to
the organization.
However, most traditional companies are not structured to institutionalize these three practices. Many operate as multidivisional organizations characterized by
multiple profit and loss units with duplicated functions,
limited cross-functional information flow, and internal
competition for resources.² This setup makes it difficult
to scale generative AI use cases across processes and units.

Christian Gralingen

In our research, we found that the few leaders who
are overcoming these challenges are moving beyond the
classical hub-and-spoke models that many organizations
have used to connect centralized AI technical expertise
to each unit. They are developing a new kind of internal
resource that we call the AI spine. It provides a flexible
core structure for implementing, evolving, and abandoning LLM use cases at scale, keeping the generative
AI portfolio both focused and current. Notably, rather
than deploying technologists out into business units, as
is commonly done, this structure pulls individuals with
domain knowledge of business processes into the core
and makes them part of the team.
A retail bank that we studied demonstrates the kind
of scaling and value creation that an AI spine supports.
Initially, the bank’s AI spine spearheaded the implementation of an email assistant for customer service employees. In an early, limited rollout, those using the assistant
collectively saved about 700 hours. Once the tool was put
into wider use, it reduced email handling time by 15%,
allowing employees to dedicate more time to managing
complex cases. Encouraged by that success, the spine
oversaw the implementation of LLM-powered email
thread summaries, call transcriptions, and analyses. That
yielded data that provided new insights for customer service employees, leading the bank to start reengineering
its approach to customer relationship management. The
data was also used to develop the next iterations of the
email assistant.
We observed another example at a medical coding
company that applies standardized alphanumeric codes
to documentation related to diagnoses, treatments, and

THE RESEARCH
Over three years (2022-2025), two of the
authors (Kevin and Ivo) engaged with 23 Swiss
companies that were members of a research
consortium focused on generative AI. The study
participants represented a diverse array of
industries: retail banking, investment banking,
health insurance, insurance, medical coding,
energy, law, laboratory instrument manufacturing,
equipment manufacturing, postal services, and
technology consulting. During the research
period, the authors gathered data from more
than 10 workshops that the consortium convened
and conducted an additional 87 in-depth semistructured interviews with front-line employees,
business leaders, technology leaders, data leaders,
and C-suite executives.

procedures for the purposes of insurance and health care
management. There, the AI spine provided a structure
that allowed it to turn its first LLM application for automated coding into a new line of business. An internal LLM
application had reduced coding time from 25 minutes
per case to 2 seconds, cutting the cost of coding by 60%
compared with having humans doing the work. (Affected
staff members were able to take on other responsibilities.)
The AI spine was able to build out the application into
a product for insurance companies that need to verify
whether bills have been correctly coded, increasing the
company’s reach into the medical insurance market and
creating a new revenue stream.

Connecting AI Efforts Across the Enterprise
The AI spine is a cross-functional backbone that is dedicated to diffusing and scaling LLM use cases across the
organization, focusing on reducing duplicative efforts and
achieving economies of scale as solutions expand across
business units and processes. Because it is a central point
for collaboration between technologists and those holding
business domain knowledge, the spine holds the expertise
required for rewiring and continually improving processes
end to end and across functions, as in the bank example
above. As we found at the medical coding company, this
structure can be implemented not only in large organizations but also in small and medium-sized enterprises.
In the cases we observed, funding for the AI spine
was allocated by top management, and the spine also
got a cut of increased revenue or costs savings resulting
from applications deployed. That mechanism creates the
right incentives: It forces the organization to measure
ROI, stay focused, and avoid disproportionate spending
on “convenience” use cases that seem useful but don’t
materially affect costs or revenue. By being independently
funded, the spine maintains decision-making autonomy
vis-à-vis other divisions so it can identify and encourage
use cases that have the potential to improve processes
cutting across divisions. A more traditional AI center of
excellence with a hub-and-spoke structure is more likely
to focus on cases within individual business units rather
than across them.
The spine is overseen by a C-suite leader, who keeps
its efforts aligned with overall strategic objectives; this
may be a chief technology officer or chief digital officer,
or one of their direct subordinates. Sitting within the
structure are AI developers, risk and compliance personnel, and a technology owner. (See “The AI Spine,” p. 31.)
The technology owner is responsible for preventing
the fragmentation of data flows and tools. They typically oversee the creation of centralized data platforms,
prompt libraries, models, and evaluation and technical

summer 2026

sloanreview.mit.edu

27

AI IN THE
ENTERPRISE

Organization

Scaling GenAI at a Swiss Bank
The bank’s early initiative to develop a GenAI-based email
assistant for customer service demonstrated the technology’s
potential to improve processes. Next, the organization made
a general-purpose ChatGPT-based tool, Company AI Chat,
Moneybroadly available. This allowed employees who were closest to
Laundering
processes
to
experiment
with
generative
AI
to
improve
Policy Bot
Case
their own workflows and identify additional use cases
March 2026
Assistant
in other departments. Business unit heads in turn
March 2026
brought these use case ideas to the AI spine
for implementation. Because the use
cases emerged from the target users
Feedback
CRM Bot
themselves, the risk of low adoption
Assistant
October 2025
October 2025
once an application was deployed
was significantly reduced.
Writing
Assistant

AskHR Tool
June 2025

February 2025

Email
Assistant

AI Code
October 2024

November 2024

Company
AI Chat
August 2024
PROOF OF CONCEPT

Customer Service
Email Assistant
April 2024

performance metrics (including token consumption and
financial costs). This oversight reduces rework and lowers marginal costs as applications are diffused across the
organization.
To ensure that risk and compliance are managed
throughout each iteration of a use case, the person managing those issues is a permanent fixture in the spine. Mak-

28 MIT Sloan Management Review

summer 2026

ing that a permanent role expedites compliance issues and
centralizes organizational learning and memory so they
can be rapidly applied to other use cases. This means that
governance is less ad hoc than it is within other structures
for organizing AI work, where a general risk and compliance group sits outside and is often overwhelmed by
issues specific to AI.

Sitting within the business units but working closely
with the AI spine are business owners, knowledge owners, and designated end users. Business owners — that is,
the heads of the business units working with the spine
on use cases — are the primary bridge between their unit
and the spine. They are responsible for identifying processes where they can make a good use case for GenAI
and determining nontechnical baselines and targets (for
example, star ratings assigned by end users, where a minimum 3 out of 5 stars would be the goal). They are also
accountable for implementing proven use cases for the
identified processes and making sure that use cases that
underdeliver are dropped. This ensures that proofs of
concept don’t stall out or remain confined to a specific
business unit. The business owner also enlists representatives from each unit to serve as knowledge owners, and
end users who can deliver feedback, to ensure that new
applications create real value for the business.
Knowledge owners work with the technology owner
to ensure that both explicit and tacit knowledge critical
to the use case are understood by technologists and captured by the application. They curate ground truth and
provide important feedback on the generative AI components that will become de facto repositories for organizational knowledge. Prompt libraries, for example, need to
be current with company policies and safety guardrails to
generate appropriate responses. Knowledge owners are
able to quickly identify issues within their domain, reducing rework and costly escalations as GenAI use cases are
implemented and evolve. They also help to rein in GenAI
work when a tool’s performance is strong enough from a
business perspective, regardless of technical performance.
In other words, a solution may not be technically perfect
but still good enough that employees find that it makes
their work easier.
Select end users of generative AI solutions work with
the spine to validate that a use case will be helpful to its
intended users. This is important because underperforming use cases lead to low adoption rates, workarounds,
and, in some cases, shadow AI. End users also provide
critical feedback on post-implementation performance,
such as identifying edge cases. Their input drives the next
iteration of application improvements.
The AI spine serves as a central point for short standup
meetings that are held regularly, perhaps every other week.
At the bank, spine members use the meeting to share lessons learned, discuss ongoing and future priorities, and
communicate changes that have been made to knowledge
repositories, such as prompt libraries. They hold a summit event every month and invite end users to keep them
updated with progress, show them demos, and gather
their feedback. These events capture needed adjustments

during the development process so that applications don’t
have to be reworked after they go live. They also help manage users’ expectations and apprehensions.
Pulling the five roles above and the AI developers
into a self-contained, highly connected structure helps to
effectively align stakeholder interests, ensure that salient
knowledge in the organization is contributed where it
will have an impact, facilitate collaboration across functions, and more effectively diffuse knowledge and value
across business units. Those activities support the key
GenAI scaling practices we introduced at the beginning
of this article: selecting use cases for implementation;
gradually expanding their scope across processes; continuously improving each use case; and taking rapid action
on underperforming use cases. The examples below show
how the AI spine works.

Respecting Domain Experience and
Expertise to Tune Performance
When the bank initially built its email assistant, the effort
focused on technical issues, such as integrating information relevant to customer service from the company
website and internal documents. While the assistant functioned as designed from a technical perspective, customer
service agents were underwhelmed. They reported that
responses to customer queries that the application generated were plausible but often incomplete or subtly misaligned with the bank’s standards, and that the tone of
the messages was inconsistent. Agents frequently had to
modify messages before they were fit to be sent back to
customers. Those results underscored the importance
of making better use of the tacit knowledge the agents
possessed, which wasn’t captured in available data sets.
The customer service agents’ feedback gave developers in the spine a foundation for subsequent iterations.
Because those end users were represented at regular project review meetings convened at the spine level, and the
spine had the authority to veto underperforming releases
(while pushing forward when all criteria were met), the
company had the opportunity to get the application right.
The AI spine also used mechanisms to surface more
tacit knowledge. Customer service employees were compensated for rating each generated response on a scale of
1-5, and their manual edits to those responses were logged
for review. This provided critical data to evaluate the performance of the email assistant, creating a feedback loop
that surfaced the organization’s unwritten norms regarding tone, intent, escalation thresholds, and edge cases,
which can take a significant amount of time to answer.
Since then, the bank’s AI spine has routinized the use of
ratings and the logging of edits to AI-generated contents
as key metrics for other use cases, complementing tech-

summer 2026

sloanreview.mit.edu

29

AI IN THE
ENTERPRISE

Organization

nical metrics. That practice allows them to identify cases
where efforts dedicated to addressing model or prompt
shortcomings are likely to generate value, thus focusing
human effort where it will be most valuable. For example, the email assistant’s performance was significantly
improved when customer service employees shared their
knowledge of how customers typically phrase requests.
Compensating employees for their efforts and
directing them to higher-value tasks reduced attrition
and alleviated their concerns about job security. Retaining employees with deep domain knowledge is critical
for generative AI because they help curate data, refine
and update prompts, and provide feedback on outputs.
When GenAI is deployed in a business unit with high
employee churn, over time there are fewer people who
can confidently validate outputs without having to refer
to documentation — a slow process that undermines
productivity gains.
The spine structure brings discussion of both technical issues and business issues to a single forum and fosters a common language so that everyone can contribute
to a multifaceted discussion of application performance.
This played out at the medical coding company, where
the coding application initially performed poorly and AI
developers saw the problem as a technical issue that could
potentially be resolved through additional data collection. However, nontechnical participants in the AI spine
reviewed the results and challenged the engineers. On
closer inspection, they found that ground-truth labels
used to train the model were inconsistent and that the
system was, in fact, outperforming human coders. The
labeling inconsistencies arose because different groups
of coders had differing levels of medical education. Discovering those inconsistencies allowed developers to
implement a timely fix in the next iteration of the tool
and avoid wasting time and resources training the model
on an improperly curated data set.

Accelerating AI Adoption and Aligning
Stakeholders Across Processes
Both the bank and the medical coding company set strategic goals for generative AI adoption, but business units
were reluctant to directly fund GenAI use cases because
of the high degree of uncertainty associated with such
initiatives, given the unpredictability and unreliability
that foundation LLMs are known for. Ideas would seem
promising and sometimes work well on a small scale or
as proofs of concept but fail to move further. Establishing the AI spine as a separate entity with a clear connection to executives helped maintain strategic alignment.
At the bank, the AI spine funds use cases across multiple phases through microgrants tied to meeting both
technical and nontechnical performance criteria; a sim30 MIT Sloan Management Review

summer 2026

ilar pattern was observed in the medical coding company. This approach helps build solutions and manage
risk incrementally for long-term initiatives. In both companies, the spine acts as a catalyst for achievements and
lessons that can benefit all business units. While moving
funding decisions for generative AI initiatives away from
business units was initially perceived as problematic, over
time it resulted in bolder innovation.
Members of the AI spine in each company also realized that process knowledge was highly fragmented. Each
business unit had a fairly clear idea as to how its part of
a given process worked, but a clear vision of the entire
process from end to end across units was missing. The
spine championed the mapping of key processes where
GenAI use cases had been proposed, involving stakeholders from each business unit until these processes could
be drawn accurately. With these representations, they
could clearly communicate the scope of use cases and
their potential expansion, as well as see GenAI’s applicability across multiple use cases, as illustrated by the
creation of a new revenue stream for the medical coding company. Unlike AI centers of excellence, which are
primarily geared toward the centralization of technological know-how, the AI spine centralizes business process
knowledge to fuel innovation.

Maintain Momentum for Continuous
Improvement and Diffusion
The AI spine is set up not to deliver technology solutions to internal customers as in the typical hub-andspoke arrangement but to codevelop them with business
unit representatives and continually refine them based
on user feedback and other performance metrics. That
means business units are less likely to wind up shelving
underperforming use cases that have been delivered by
a team that’s moved on to something else.
The bank capitalized on its AI spine’s facility for
iterative experimentation and treated generative AI as
a constant work in progress. While the email assistant
eventually led to significant time savings for customer
service agents, getting there took multiple incremental
rollouts that continually raised the bar. Clear technical
and business performance targets defined an apparent
goal at each iteration that determined whether the solution would be rolled out to end users. It also gave teams
time to learn progressively and to assimilate new technological developments in a field that evolves quickly.
Embedding varying degrees of work automation led to
a more granular view of performance. One version of the
email assistant was good at extracting information from
customer messages, but the voice, tone, and style of its
written responses were off. Messages that included a lot
of bullet points and overly familiar phrasing felt more

culturally attuned to the U.S. market than to the more
reserved Swiss culture.
Keeping the momentum to continue innovating with
GenAI requires a careful balance between the exploitation
of existing use cases and the exploration of new ones. The
AI spine’s orientation toward users, and the priority that
its structure places on better understanding how employees interact with GenAI across processes, has helped
the bank to develop new use cases. (See “Scaling GenAI
at a Swiss Bank,” p. 28.) By studying those user interactions through employee surveys and shadowing sessions,
the bank was able to identify eight new potential use
cases, two of which have since been deployed alongside
the email assistant: the AskHR chatbot, which answers
HR-related questions on topics such as employee benefits; and an employee handbook chatbot that responds
to employee questions about what is permitted and forbidden in the execution of their jobs.

The Drawbacks of Simpler GenAI
Structures
Among the 23 organizations that participated in our
research, only two were able to meaningfully scale generative AI to a strategic capability, and both of them had
created structures recognizable as an AI spine. While that

is an admittedly small evidence base, companies achieving such results are currently in the minority, and we
believe that their practices are worthy of close attention.
Building an AI spine requires significant top-level
commitment, time, effort, and funding. The other organizations that were part of our research adopted one of two
alternative structures — what we’ve termed GenAI units
and GenAI squads — that we see as potential building
blocks to a more robust capability. They were still able to
exploit generative AI to achieve some economies of scale,
but the scope of their efforts was narrower, and they faced
challenges expanding their use of GenAI.
Thirteen of the organizations we studied set up
a standalone, central GenAI unit. These are typically
technology-focused and charged with providing solutions to the business units. While often the most feasible approach when resources are constrained, the GenAI
unit can quickly reveal its limits regarding business (rather
than technical) performance and user adoption. A Swiss
health insurer illustrates this limitation. Its generative AI
unit tried to roll out an email assistant for its customer
service center agents. The model could produce fluent
replies, but compliance specialists, consulted only after
the pilot, pointed out that every customer message had to
follow tightly regulated text templates. Fearing noncom-

The AI Spine
The technology owner, developers, and AI engineers sit within the AI spine, as do dedicated risk
and compliance experts. Business owners, knowledge owners, and end users across the company
connect into the spine, which serves as the meeting point for aligning on cross-functional issues.
Business Unit A

Business Unit C

A

A

A

C

C

C

Business
Owner

End user

Knowledge
Owner

Business
Owner

End user

Knowledge
Owner

B
Business
Owner

A
Business
Owner

Tech
Owners

End
Users

Knowledge
Owners

AI
Engineers

C
Business
Owner

B

B

B

Business
Owner

End user

Knowledge
Owner

Software
Developers

Risk &
Compliance

Business Unit B

summer 2026

sloanreview.mit.edu

31

AI IN THE
ENTERPRISE

Organization

pliance, customer service center agents reverted back to
approved texts, and so adoption plateaued and the project
stalled. Without a mechanism to coordinate work across
multiple functions (in this case, risk, legal, and customer
service), the bank was left with a zombie GenAI use case
with no clear path forward. This early failure increased
organizational skepticism toward generative AI, making it
increasingly difficult to garner support for future use cases.
A stand-alone GenAI unit can be useful for the early,
exploratory stages of the technology: It concentrates talent and lets the organization explore GenAI’s potential
before committing major resources. However, it cannot
properly assess the specific needs of each unit or coordinate work across multiple use cases, and it lacks an
end-to-end view of processes that could be improved
with GenAI.
Another approach, taken by eight organizations in our
study, is to embed small, cross-functional GenAI squads
within each business unit. The companies using GenAI
squads were able to take ideas to working pilots much
more quickly than those using GenAI units, because they
were better able to harness relevant business know-how
and faced fewer coordination challenges. However, the
squads struggled to manage use cases at various levels of
maturity. A Swiss insurer’s GenAI squad launched a customer-facing chatbot for product information in record
time. Just a few weeks later, curious users prompted the
chatbot to recommend pizza recipes. That incident led
to multiple iterations aimed at hardening the system —
and revealed how rolling out the initial implementation
of a generative AI solution is often easier than maintaining and improving it. As the portfolio of use cases
expanded, the mounting maintenance burden of updating
data sources and prompts stretched the GenAI squad to
its limits, leaving little capacity for pursuing new use cases.
Because GenAI squads are funded and staffed by the
business units, they can lead to inequities and inconsistent
technology adoption at the enterprise level. Some units
have the means to fund multiple use cases and hire their
own staff. Others must lower their expectations, regardless of the potential value of a use case. This structure
perpetuates silos and duplicative efforts; the lack of an
end-to-end view of business processes limits value creation at the organizational level. GenAI squads can help to
quickly spread generative AI adoption within the organization, but leaders need a different approach if their goal
is to coordinate GenAI use cases across the organization.
CREATING VALUE AT SCALE WITH GENERAtive AI does not come from giving everyone access to
an LLM and hoping that something magical will happen.
Instead, we advise leaders to begin by creating and

32 MIT Sloan Management Review

summer 2026

Define early on what
“value” means, to help
identify underperforming
use cases and normalize
dropping them.
visibly supporting a small, cross-functional AI spine that
can coordinate across business units. The spine should be
charged with standardizing and centralizing core building blocks (processes, data, evaluations, prompts, and
models).
That mandate must be matched by financial resources.
Central funding is essential because it enables the spine to
pursue cross-business-unit opportunities that no single
business unit alone would sponsor. In addition, executives
must define early on what “value” means, to help identify
underperforming use cases and normalize dropping them.
Finally, while creating value at scale with GenAI initially depends on a top-down decision by business leaders,
sustaining and expanding that value over time depends on
continued contributions from business units. Executives
should empower and expect the AI spine to convene the
technology owner, risk and compliance, business owners,
knowledge owners, and end users in continuous collaboration so that their respective expertise can be combined
to surface and capture tacit knowledge, align performance
with real operating standards, and ensure that improvements compound rather than stall after the pilot phase. ▪
Kevin Schmitt is a research associate at the Institute of Information Systems and Digital Business at the University of St. Gallen.
Gregory Vial is an associate professor in the Department of
Information Technologies at HEC Montréal. Ivo Blohm is an associate professor at the Institute of Information Systems and Digital
Business at the University of St. Gallen.
REFERENCES
1. M. Wade, K. Trantopoulos, M. Navas, et al., “How to Scale GenAI in
the Workplace,” MIT Sloan Management Review, July 8, 2025, https://
sloanreview.mit.edu; and E. Mollick, “Reinventing the Organization for
GenAI and LLMs,” MIT Sloan Management Review, April 2, 2024, https://
sloanreview.mit.edu.
2. P. Reineke, R. Katila, and K.M. Eisenhardt, “Decentralization in
Organizations: A Revolution or a Mirage?” Academy of Management
Annals 19, no. 1 (January 2025): 298-342, https://doi.org/10.5465/
annals.2022.0206.
Reprint 67417. For ordering information, see page 4. Copyright ©
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2026. All rights reserved.
https://doi.org/10.63383/vveF4479

PDFs · Reprints ·
Permission to Copy ·
Back Issues
Articles published in MIT Sloan Management Review are
copyrighted by the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology unless otherwise specified.
MIT Sloan Management Review articles, permissions, and
back issues can be purchased on our website,
shop.sloanreview.mit.edu.
Reproducing or distributing one or more MIT Sloan
Management Review articles requires written
permission.
To request permission, use our website
shop.sloanreview.mit.edu/store/faq or email
smr-help@mit.edu

© MIT Sloan Management Review, 2026

