# Extracted source text

- Source ID: SRC-UC-000006
- Original relative path: use_cases/general_use/ai_academy_guidebook_customer_service.pdf
- Current relative path: use_cases/general_use/ai_academy_guidebook_customer_service.pdf
- Classification: public
- Processing route: external_processing_approved
- Processing state: extracted
- Extraction tool: pdftotext
- Extraction attempted at: 2026-07-24T13:59:58Z

---

Put AI to work
for customer service

IBM

Contents
Generative AI (gen AI) is no longer
a future possibility—it’s already
revolutionizing customer service.
With 40% of customers agreeing that
AI should raise the bar on customer
experiences, businesses are harnessing
the power of AI to drive efficiency and
deliver on that expectation.1

How are AI agents shaping the
customer service landscape?
Page 3 →
Customer service
boosted by AI
Page 10 →
AI in customer service
is no longer a choice
Page 12 →
Optimize your AI to elevate
customer satisfaction
Page 22 →
Ready to level up?
Page 26 →

2

01

How are AI agents
shaping the
customer service
landscape?

3

01

AI agents offer a comprehensive suite
of tools that enhance and facilitate the
development, oversight, and governance
of AI models within an enterprise
environment. By prioritizing collaboration,
efficiency, and regulatory compliance,
these agents ensure that users, regardless
of varying technical expertise, can
effectively engage with and benefit from
AI capabilities.

4

01

In a 2023 study, the IBM Institute
for Business Value found that
responding executives have 4 top

How are AI agents shaping the
customer service landscape?

61%

have concerns about data
lineage or provenance.

57%

have concerns about
data security.

53%

have concerns about
the constraints introduced by
regulations and compliance.

45%

have concerns about
data privacy.

concerns about gen AI adoption.2

5

01

How are AI agents shaping the
customer service landscape?

AI agents are no longer peripheral
additions but the core drivers of business
transformation, particularly in the context of
customer service and the evolution of gen
AI. They have evolved from mere support
systems to central components
that actively shape and accelerate
technological advancements.
AI agents serve as integral participants in
the development of gen AI, handling data
annotation with efficiency and speed, which
is crucial for training sophisticated generative
models. Their continuous feedback analysis
through reinforcement learning not only
refines these models' performance but also
enhances their contextual understanding and
content quality.

When it comes to customer service, AI
agents have transcended typical automation.
They harness gen AI capabilities to engage in
lifelike conversations, providing personalized
and contextually relevant responses. This
extends their utility beyond routine inquiries
to addressing complex issues that require
nuanced understanding. The round-theclock availability and immediate response
times they offer not only elevate customer
satisfaction but also optimize resource
allocation, as human agents are freed up to
tackle more complex matters.

6

Agentic AI ladder
in modern practice

AI+

Employ AI assistants and agents to
bolster your operations:

Empower teams with AI assistance
Refine workflows
Automate strategically
Integrate AI capabilities
Strategize data management

+AI

7

01

AI assistants and agents are
not mutually exclusive;
they complement each other,
offering a holistic approach to
business transformation.

How are AI agents shaping the
customer service landscape?

AI
Assistants ↷

AI
Agents ↷

Traditional AI assistants apply predefined
rules and algorithms to specific datasets,
excelling in tasks such as:

AI agents, on the other hand, utilize large
language models (LLMs) to create new
content based on learned patterns such as:

– Customer churn prediction
– Net Promoter Score (NPS) tracking
– Network anomaly detection:
– Conversational AI for virtual agents and chatbots
– Intelligent workflows

– Call summarization and analysis
– Personalized recommendations
– New product, service or plan development
– Explanatory video customization
– Network optimization

8

01

How are AI agents shaping the
customer service landscape?

Recognizing the symbiotic
relationship between AI
assistants and AI agents is
key to maximizing their
potential. Together, they can
synergize to achieve strategic
objectives, driving innovation,
efficiency and competitive
advantage in the modern
business landscape.

9

02

Customer service
boosted by AI

10

02

Customer service
boosted by AI

Customers expect excellence and delivering
them the best possible experience is a
strategic business imperative.
Gen AI is helping enhance the customer
experience to match up to heightened
customer expectations.
Today’s consumers demand superior service,
and agents are busier than ever in an
attempt to meet the demands.
Customers expect fast and accurate answers
to their questions all day, every day, on
their channel of choice. While previous
generations of chatbots have helped
stem the tide, a combination of gen AI, AI
assistants and AI agents offers companies
the ability to deliver on customer service
aspirations that seemed unthinkable before.
Executives are already on board—customer
service is the #1 gen AI investment priority
for CEOs surveyed, according to research
from the IBM Institute for Business Value.3

AI is already solving many challenges in
customer service, from upgrading customer
self-service to supporting customer service
professionals and empowering them to focus
on more complex problems.
It’s also helping optimize contact centers so
they not only resolve customer issues but
also become a source of new revenue. By
providing responses, recommendations and
even new offers tailored to each customer, AI
is helping to increase customer satisfaction
and loyalty.

11

03

AI in customer
service is no
longer a choice

12

Put AI to work for
customer service
While the potential
applications of agentic AI
span the entire customer
service lifecycle, there are
three particular areas where
the technology can be
employed to help you delight
your customers and optimize
your customer service team:

13

03

AI in customer service
is no longer a choice

Enhancing
customer
self-service
At the core of customer self-service is the
desire to give customers the information
and support they need quickly, enabling
customers to resolve common issues
themselves so human agents can focus on
those issues that are more complex.
Plus, customers expect to be able to engage
on their preferred device and channel,
whether it’s through a live chat, email or
phone call on the company’s website, apps
or social media accounts.

Customer satisfaction depends on more
than just receiving predetermined responses
to common questions. Gen AI can take
customer service to a whole new level,
facilitating more personalized interactions.
Virtual agents, powered by an AI assistant
and built for customer self-service, can
answer questions, but do so in the context of
that customer and their situation. They can
take into account implied nuances, such as
the customer’s sentiment, support history
and relationship with the company.

14

03

Customer
self-service
workflow

AI in customer service
is no longer a choice

1

Direct access: The customer contacts customer service
in their preferred language, using any application, device
or channel.

2

Conversational problem solving: The customer explains
their problem or request to the virtual agent using
conversational language.

3
4

AI agent driven resolution: The virtual agent draws on
known customer data, corporate documents and processes
to determine the correct response, thus providing fast and
accurate answers that resolve the customer’s issue.
Issue escalation: If the virtual agent is unable to solve the
issue, it seamlessly transfers the customer to a human agent
along with a comprehensive summary of the interaction.

15

03

AI in customer service
is no longer a choice

Self-service virtual agents can function as
a single router to bring all your company’s
relevant resources together, from technology
to data to personnel. Along with answering
questions, AI agents can also provide
customers with interactive support for
multistep or complex tasks.

A real-life example is Redi, an AI-powered
conversational assistant for Virgin Money
that’s accessible through the bank’s mobile
app, was developed with the help off IBM
Consulting® AI experts. Since its launch,
Redi has had more than 2 million interactions
with Virgin Money customers, and it has a
94% customer satisfaction rate among
those surveyed.4

16

03

AI in customer service
is no longer a choice

Empowering
the customer
service team
To build and maintain positive customer
experiences and relationships, you rely on
your customer service teams’ performance,
productivity and knowledge. But do they have
access to the most recent interactions with
the customer? Do they have a full view into
the customer’s situation and history with
your company? Do they have an easy way to
see that level of detail and take advantage
of automated summaries so they can deliver
seamless service and support? Can they
automatically generate email responses?
AI agents can.

Research by the National Bureau of Economic
Research (NBER) shows that when customer
support professionals were given access to
AI agents, their productivity increased by an
average of 14%, with the greatest impact on
novice and low-skilled workers.5
This research suggests that AI agents could
help companies train newly onboarded
customer service professionals faster and
bring them up to speed with their more
experienced colleagues. The study also found
that with the assistance of AI agents, there
was improved customer sentiment, reduced
requests for managerial intervention and
improved employee retention.

Nearly two-thirds of CEOs (63%) surveyed
by the IBM Institute for Business Value
say that by the end of 2023 they’ll have
already invested in gen AI use cases to serve
agents directly.6 This deployment includes
agent training and enabling agents to
interact directly with technical applications
for improved assistance. Powered by
IBM® watsonx Assistant™, a next-gen
conversational AI solution, retailer Camping
World increased agent efficiency by 33% and
decreased wait times to 33 seconds overall
by modernizing its contact centers with
IBM Consulting.

17

03

Customer
service professional
experience workflow

AI in customer service
is no longer a choice

1
2
3
4

Informed handoff: The customer support professional
receives a summary of the customer’s interaction with the
virtual agent, along with their history with the company
and their perceived sentiment about the company.

Seamless continuity: The customer support professional
reviews the summary to seamlessly pick up the
customer interaction.

Collaborative resolution: The customer support
professional uses their own expertise to address the issue
and may take the guidance of AI agents to supplement
their knowledge. The customer support professional
resolves the customer issue and receives an automated
summary of the interaction for documentation and to further
train the system.

Post-resolution support: The customer support
professional receives suggested follow-up messages
and personalized recommendations generated for
each customer.

18

03

AI in customer service
is no longer a choice

Contact center
operations
AI agents can help perform the repetitive
tasks necessary to gather the data needed
to optimize your contact center, freeing
up your customer support teams’ time to
focus on complex problems. From those
datasets, AI agents can identify patterns and
insights—and learn from the information they
gather. This capability helps contact centers
optimize the network, personalize customer
communications and recommendations,
and even develop new products or services
to potentially turn contact centers into
revenue generators.

With targeted data collection, AI agents can
help you understand customers and provide
recommendation offers and solutions based on
their behavior and history with your company.
This type of personalization is designed to
make customers feel valued and help increase
their satisfaction and loyalty.
IBM client NatWest Group knows that effective
digital communications are essential to its
business—94% of its customers use digital
banking. Using gen AI, the bank transformed
its virtual agent Cora+ into a multichannel
interaction platform powered by IBM® watsonx
Assistant™. After the transformation, NatWest
saw approximately 150% improvement in
customer satisfaction with some answers.7
Those types of increases unlock the potential
for more revenue.

19

03

Why AI in customer service matters

Contact center
operations workflow

1

Customer arrivals: Customers come to the contact center to
get their issues with the business or its offerings resolved.

2

Rapid AI agent response: AI agents provide fast, accurate
responses to customer inquiries to speed time to resolution
(TTR) and increase customer satisfaction.

3
4
5

Customer service professional empowerment: AI agents
provide case summaries to customer service professionals
so they can deliver seamless service, increase productivity
and boost job satisfaction.
Pattern identification and optimization: Information
gained from customer interactions with both virtual and
human agents is used to continue training AI agents, which
optimizes how the contact center operates.
Personalized services: Customer profiles are built based
on this information to create personalized experiences
to delight customers, build brand loyalty and deliver
compelling, relevant offers that boost revenue.

20

03

Put AI to work for customer service

If organizations have a hard time handling
the incoming call load, it can affect
customer satisfaction, increase operational
costs and lead to suboptimal utilization of
contact center resources.

Wipro, an IBM Business Partner, built
several AI-powered customer service
accelerators, using the IBM watsonx.aiTM
AI studio, to help revolutionize businesses’
contact service operations.

The Wipro AI practice offers a
comprehensive solution to enhance the
customer experience and help drive cost
savings for organizations. This solution can
help improve customer satisfaction, cut costs
and streamline resources by reducing wait
times and automating incoming calls.8

21

04

Optimize your AI to
elevate customer
satisfaction

22

04

Optimize your AI to elevate
customer satisfaction

1
As CEOs and CCOs aim to refine and
maximize their existing AI investments, here
are some key considerations to keep in mind:
As enterprises transition from the hype to
the how of gen AI, it becomes even more
critical to understand the costs of—and
the value derived from—investments in the
technology. CEOs and CCOs know they need
to tread carefully while adopting it, but they
also feel the need to act fast. Still, according
to an IBM Institute for Business Value study,
60% of organizations surveyed have not yet
developed a consistent, enterprise-wide
approach to gen AI.9

Refine your AI strategy
Optimize your AI objectives to align with your
business goals. You’ve likely already got a
customer experience strategy in place, but
how is your current AI helping you achieve
those goals? Identify the key performance
indicators (KPIs) against which you you’re
going to track performance. Having a strategy
that incorporates all these elements—
and more— is critical to understanding
your business’ costs, budget and future
investment in service transformation.

Once this strategy is outlined, you can
identify the areas to enhance existing AI as
well as find new deployment opportunities
to elevate your customer satisfaction and to
drive efficiency.
For help with defining your enterprise’s
strategy and priority use cases, get in
touch with IBM Consulting. In addition
to our customer service transformation
experience, IBM Consulting has over 20,000
experts in AI and a dedicated Generative AI
Center of Excellence with more than 1,000
professionals.

Here’s how you can get started.

23

04

Optimize your AI to elevate
customer satisfaction

2
Identify the right datasets and model
AI is only as trusted and accurate as
the data that fuels it. Selecting the
appropriate model—considering size,
type and performance—is pivotal for
seamless AI integration enterprise-wide,
enhancing efficiency. Models must not
only be trained with high-quality data but
also calibrated to deliver accurate, brandaligned responses.
IBM Consulting works with an open
ecosystem of technology partners to
help ensure we can find the right fit for
your business. Our agile and expertisecentered approach to business design,
coupled with our portfolio of AI-enabled
workflow accelerators, can help you
to scale AI quickly. We have more
than 1,250 active AI clients worldwide
and over 40,000 AI and analytics
engagements under our belt.

IBM Consulting, leveraging its deep
expertise in data and AI, collaborates
with clients to refine, validate, optimize
and deploy both traditional and
generative AI models. These models,
including those driven by IBM's advanced
foundation models like IBM Granite®, are
deployable via the watsonx.ai™ studio.
This integration empowers businesses to
swiftly develop AI applications using their
proprietary datasets.

IBM watsonx Orchestrate™ emerges as a
cornerstone in this framework, facilitating
the efficient, secure and scalable
management of diverse AI models and
workflows. It offers a unified platform
to orchestrate, monitor, and govern AI
operations across the enterprise. By
consolidating and simplifying complex
AI infrastructures, watsonx Orchestrate™
dissolves data silos, optimizes performance,
and ensures secure, compliant AI
deployment—all while enhancing the
accuracy and relevance of AI outcomes
through meticulous data management and
model training.

IBM watsonx Orchestrate serves as the
governance hub for managing and overseeing
AI activities across your organization. This
platform enables the direction, management
and monitoring of AI models, regardless
of the platform or deployment method—be
it cloud or on-premises. Leveraging IBM
Consulting's AI ethics expertise, businesses
can establish and enforce AI standards
that align with their values and regulatory
requirements, ensuring responsible and
effective AI use throughout the enterprise.

24

04

Optimize your AI to elevate
customer satisfaction

3
Find the right partner
Few companies have access to the AI skills
and service transformation knowledge
required to be successful in-house, so it’s
essential to partner with external experts
to round out your team’s expertise. Assess
which AI-enabled technologies and
implementation partners are required to
meet your customer service mission. Find
out if it’s possible to build from your existing
platform investments, or if a new approach is
needed. Remember, there’s no
one-size-fits-all approach.
Additionally, our IBM Business Partners are
well placed to help with the implementation,
maintenance and management of your
infrastructure and software.

25

05

Ready to
level up?

26

05

Register for a discovery
session with IBM AI
experts today.
Explore IBM’s AI solutions and expertise
and learn how you can optimize AI to elevate
business transformation.
IBM has the technology, consulting expertise
and an extensive partner network to help you
move forward quickly with AI.

Ready to level up?

AI expertise

AI portfolio

IBM Consulting® specializes in end-to-end
customer service transformation, spanning
AI strategy, design, implementation and
ongoing management of customer and
field service operations. IBM has formed
a Center of Excellence (CoE) for gen AI,
specialized in applying the IBM watsonx®
portfolio and IBM ecosystem partner
technologies to rapidly create coherent
strategies and accelerate how we address
business problems. The CoE complements
more than 21,000 IBM data and AI
consultants with AI experience who are
already collaborating with thousands of
global clients and partners to shape the
future of AI.

IBM watsonx™ Orchestrate™ helps build
personalized generative AI-powered
assistants and agents to automate and
accelerate your work.
AI partners
IBM Partner Plus® is an extensive partner
network, backed by our AI and hybrid
cloud solutions, that’s ready to meet your
demands for quick tech adaptation and deep
understanding. These partnerships drive
innovation and growth, solving complex
challenges with speed and value.

27

1. State of the AI connected customer, Seventh Edition, Salesforce, 2024.

© Copyright IBM Corporation 2025

2. The CEO’s guide to generative AI: Platforms, data, and governance, IBM Institute for
Business Value, 12 September 2023.

IBM, the IBM logo, IBM Consulting, IBM Partner
Plus, IBM watsonx, Granite, watsonx.ai, watsonx
Assistant,and watsonx Orchestrate are trademarks
or registered trademarks of International Business
Machines Corporation, in the United States and/or
other countries. Other product and service names
might be trademarks of IBM or other companies.
A current list of IBM trademarks is available on
ibm.com/legal/copytrade.

3. The CEO’s guide to generative AI: Customer service, IBM Institute for Business Value,
1 August 2023.
4. Redi, the AI-powered banking virtual assistant, boosts customer engagement, IBM
case study on Virgin Money, September 2024.
5. Generative AI at Work, National Bureau of Economic Research, November 2023.
6. Driving a reimagined customer experience with an AI-powered virtual assistant, IBM
case study on Camping World, June 2022.
7. AI-led answers, empathy-led service, IBM case study on NatWest Group,
October 2024.

This document is current as of the initial date of
publication and may be changed by IBM at any time.
Not all offerings are available in every country in
which IBM operates.
Examples presented as illustrative only. Actual results
will vary based on client configurations and conditions
and, therefore, generally expected results cannot
be provided.
THE INFORMATION IN THIS DOCUMENT IS
PROVIDED “AS IS” WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING WITHOUT ANY
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR
A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND ANY WARRANTY OR
CONDITION OF NON-INFRINGEMENT. IBM products
are warranted according to the terms and conditions
of the agreements under which they are provided.

8. Transforming customer service for faster issue resolution, reduced wait times and
enhanced efficiency, IBM case study on Wipro, November 2023.
9. The CEO’s guide to generative AI, IBM Institute for Business Value, 2023.

28

